docs: WebGPU Interoperability (#605)
software-mansion/TypeGPU: apps/typegpu-docs/src/content/docs/integration/webgpu-interoperability.mdx

---
title: WebGPU Interoperability
draft: true
---

TypeGPU is built in a way that allows you to pick and choose the primitives you need, incrementally adopt them into your project and have a working app at each step

> of the process. We go to extremes to ensure that turning even a single buffer into our typed variant improves the developer experience, and does not require changes

Reviewer: It sound a little to extreme to me
```suggestion
of the process. We go to great lengths to ensure that turning even a single buffer into our typed variant improves the developer experience, and does not require changes
```

to the rest of the codebase.

> The **non-contagious** nature of TypeGPU means that ejecting out in case raw WebGPU access is required can be done on a very granular level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **non-contagious** nature of TypeGPU means that ejecting out, in case raw WebGPU access is required, can be done on a very granular level.
```

:::note
Some of the following code snippets assume that TypeGPU is already initialized.

```ts
import tgpu from 'typegpu';
import * as d from 'typegpu/data';

const root = await tgpu.init();
// ...or pass in an existing WebGPU device

> const root = await tgpu.init({ device });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const root = tgpu.initFromDevice({ device });
```

```
:::

## Points of integration

### Accessing underlying WebGPU resources

Since TypeGPU is a very thin abstraction over WebGPU, there is a 1-to-1 mapping between most typed resources

> and the raw WebGPU resource used underneath.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the raw WebGPU resources used underneath.
```

// they are essentially the same resource.
```

```ts
const fooTexture = root.createTexture({ ... }).$usage('sampled');
//    ^? TgpuTexture<...> & Sampled

const rawFooTexture = root.unwrap(fooTexture); // => GPUTexture
```

```ts
const bindGroup = root.createBindGroup(layout, { ... });
//    ^? TgpuBindGroup<...>

const rawBindGroup = root.unwrap(bindGroup); // => GPUBindGroup
```

:::tip
Each call to `root.unwrap(...)` with the same argument produces the exact same result, so there is no need to
store the raw equivalents anywhere. Just call `root.unwrap(...)` in multiple places for the same resource if
it makes the code easier to work with.
:::

### Plugging WebGPU resources into typed APIs.

Many TypeGPU APIs accept either typed resources, or their untyped equivalent.

#### Buffers

Instead of passing an initial value to `root.createBuffer`, we can pass it a raw WebGPU buffer and interact with it through
TypeGPU's APIs.

```ts
const rawBuffer = device.createBuffer({
  size: (Float32Array.BYTES_PER_ELEMENT * 4) * 2, // (xyz + padding) * 2
  usage: GPUBufferUsage.COPT_DST | GPUBufferUsage.UNIFORM,
});

const Schema = d.arrayOf(d.vec3f, 2);

> const aBuffer = root.createBuffer(Schema, rawBuffer);

Reviewer 2: maybe `typedBuffer`?

// Updates `rawBuffer` underneath.
aBuffer.write([d.vec3f(1, 2, 3), d.vec3f(4, 5, 6)]);

> // Interpreting the raw bytes in `rawBuffer` as easier
> // to work with JS values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Interpreting the raw bytes in `rawBuffer` as JS values
```

const values = await aBuffer.read(); // => d.v3f[]
```

#### Bind Group Layouts

When creating typed bind groups from a layout, entries can be populated with equivalent raw WebGPU resources.

```ts
const layout = tgpu.bindGroupLayout({
  a: { uniform: d.f32 },
  b: { uniform: d.u32 },
});

const aBuffer = root.createBuffer(d.f32, 0.5).$usage('uniform');
//    ^? TgpuBuffer<d.F32> & Uniform

const bBuffer = root.device.createBuffer({
  size: Uint32Array.BYTES_PER_ELEMENT,
  usage: GPUBufferUsage.COPY_DST | GPUBufferUsage.UNIFORM,
});
// ^? GPUBuffer

const bindGroup = root.createBindGroup(layout, {

>   a: aBuffer, // validates if the buffers holds the right data and usage on the type level.
>   b: bBuffer, // allows the raw buffer to pass through.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a: aBuffer, // Validates if the buffer holds the right data and usage on the type level.
  b: bBuffer, // Allows any raw buffer to pass through.
```

});
```

## Incremental adoption recipes

> Let us deliver on our promise and show you the small code changes necessary to adopt TypeGPU, and the benefits you can gain at each step.

Reviewer: Sound a little weird to me but I can't pinpoint why. Maybe a little too dialogue'y? Maybe something like `To deliver on the promise of interoperability ...`?

Since adoption can start growing from many points in a WebGPU codebase, feel free to choose whichever path suits your use-case the most:
- [Starting at buffers](#starting-at-buffers)
- [Starting at bind group layouts](#starting-at-bind-group-layouts)

### Starting at buffers

> ##### #1: Define a schema for a buffer's contents

Reviewer 2: skipped one level, there should be 4 hashtags. same below

> ##### #1: Define a schema for a buffer's contents

Reviewer: Maybe we could drop the `#1` format? The steps are likely to be read in order and it just looks off to me.
```suggestion
#### Define a schema for a buffer's contents
```

```diff lang="ts"
+const Schema = d.arrayOf(d.vec3f, 2);
+
const rawBuffer = device.createBuffer({
-  size: (Float32Array.BYTES_PER_ELEMENT * 4) * 2, // (xyz + padding) * 2
+  size: d.sizeOf(Schema),
  usage: GPUBufferUsage.STORAGE | GPUBufferUsage.VERTEX,
  mappedAtCreation: true,
});

new Float32Array(rawBuffer.getMappedRange()).set([
  0, 1, 2, /* padding */ 0,
  3, 4, 5, /* padding */ 0,
]);
rawBuffer.unmap();
```

Benefits gained:
- **Increased context** - a data-type schema allows developers to quickly determine what a buffer is supposed to
  contain, without the need to jump around the codebase.

> - **Automatic sizing** - schemas understand WebGPU memory layout rules, therefore can estimate the required size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Automatic sizing** - schemas understand WebGPU memory layout rules, therefore can calculate the required size
```

> - **Automatic sizing** - schemas understand WebGPU memory layout rules, therefore can estimate the required size

Reviewer: No need for estimates😎
```suggestion
- **Automatic sizing** - schemas understand WebGPU memory layout rules, therefore can calculate the required size
```

  find a layout's semantic meaning.
- **Good defaults** - binding indices are inferred automatically based on the order of properties in the descriptor, starting from `0`. Properties with the
  value `null` are skipped. The visibility is assumed based on the type of resource. Can be explicitly limited using the optional `visibility` property.

##### #2: Create bind groups from typed layouts
```diff lang="ts"
- const rawBindGroup = device.createBindGroup({
-   layout: rawLayout,
-   entries: [
-     // ambientColor
-     {
-       binding: 0,
-       resource: { buffer: rawFooBuffer },
-     },
-     // intensity
-     {
-       binding: 2,
-       resource: { buffer: rawBarBuffer },
-     },
-   ],
- });
+ const bindGroup = root.createBindGroup(layout, {
+   ambientColor: ambientColorBuffer,
+   intensity: intensityBuffer,
+ });
+
+ const rawBindGroup = root.unwrap(bindGroup);
```

Benefits gained:
- **Reduced fragility** - no longer susceptible to shifts in binding indices, as the resources are associated with a named key instead.

> - **Autocomplete** - the IDE can suggest what resources need to be passed in, and what their data type should be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Autocomplete** - the IDE can suggest what resources need to be passed in, and what their data types should be.
```

##### #3: Inject shader code

```diff lang="ts"
const layout = tgpu.bindGroupLayout({
  ambientColor: { uniform: d.vec3f }, // #0 binding
  _: null, // #1 skipped!
  intensity: { uniform: d.f32 }, // #2 binding
-});
+}).$idx(0); // <- forces code-gen to assign `0` as the group index.

const rawShader = /* wgsl*/ `
-  @group(0) @binding(0) var<uniform> ambientColor: vec3f;
-  @group(0) @binding(1) var<uniform> intensity: f32;
-
  @fragment
  fn main() -> @location(0) vec4f {
    return vec4f(ambientColor * intensity), 1.);
  }
`;

const module = device.createShaderModule({
-  code: rawShader,
+  code: tgpu.resolve({
+    input: rawShader,
+    // Matching up shader variables with layout entries:
+    //   'nameInShader': layout.bound.nameInLayout,
+    //
+    extraDependencies: {
+      ambientColor: layout.bound.ambientColor,
+      intensity: layout.bound.intensity,
+    },
+    // or just:
+    // extraDependencies: { ...layout.bound },
+  }),
});
```

Benefits gained:
- **Reduced fragility** - binding indices are now being handled end-to-end by TypeGPU, leaving human-readable keys
  as the way to connect the shader with JavaScript.

> - **Single source of truth** - typed bind group layouts not only describe JS behavior, but WGSL behavior as well. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Single source of truth** - typed bind group layouts not only describe JS behavior, but also WGSL behavior. This
```
